Good morning.
Thanks for coming, everybody.
I am Eric Brown,
the Bluetooth Software Manager at Apple,
and I'm here to talk to you a little bit
about developing Bluetooth applications.
So let's go ahead and start off
talking about Bluetooth industry
developments in the past year and kind
of look to the future a little bit.
In the past year,
we've seen Bluetooth version 1.2
introduced by the Bluetooth SIG.
A couple of notes about 1.2.
It is fully backwards compatible
with previous versions,
so it should be fully interoperable with
all of the Bluetooth hardware out there.
They've introduced a new function
called Adaptive Frequency Hopping,
or AFH for short.
You might have seen it in
some of the Apple literature.
But what it does is it allows
Bluetooth to avoid interfering with other
2.4 gigahertz wireless technologies.
So the way that it works,
it actually pays attention to where it
notices interference and then just avoids
communicating over those frequencies.
So technologies like airports, your --
and his team will be sharing
the latest updates on the latest
features and features that
Also in Bluetooth 1.2 is a new
Fast Connect capability which between
two devices that are both 1.2 compliant,
it allows greatly reduced connection
times to speed up communicating
between the two devices.
We've also added a new enhanced
SCO capability which improves the voice
quality when talking with headsets.
In the past year,
we've introduced Bluetooth firmware
update 1.1 that adds support
for the Bluetooth 1.2 spec,
and we definitely encourage developers of
new hardware to adhere to the 1.2 spec.
We're definitely focused
on that going forward.
Now there's a number of new hardware
features coming in the next year.
I can only talk about one of them,
but we think it's going
to be a pretty big,
pretty important feature,
and that's what the Bluetooth SIG is
calling Enhanced Data Rate.
They announced it earlier this month,
and it actually improves
transfer speed three times,
so upwards of 2.1 megabits per second
over the Bluetooth wireless link.
In addition,
the Enhanced Data Rate actually
allows for lower power
consumption between devices,
so that should improve battery life
of your battery-powered devices.
Unfortunately,
because it is a new design and
enhancement over the way that
Bluetooth communicates over the air,
it will require new hardware.
So hopefully later this year
we'll see this new Enhanced
Data Rate ratified by the Bluetooth SIG,
and we'll definitely be looking
to see exactly where that goes.
Okay.
Back in January,
the Bluetooth SIG announced
that at that point,
other companies were selling more than
1 million Bluetooth devices each week.
Well, as it turns out...
Thank you for joining us.
I'm Eric Brown, CEO of Apple.
I'm here to talk about the
latest technology that's
been coming out in the world.
It's a new technology that's
finally getting out to the masses.
So now let's take a look at
over the past year we've added a
number of new features to Panther.
We've added support
for Bluetooth headsets,
Bluetooth printing,
and as I just mentioned, the 1.2 spec.
I'm going to talk a little bit in
detail about exactly what these
features are and how they work.
In February, we released a Bluetooth 1.5
software update,
which was later rolled
into Mac OS X 10.3.3.
The headset support is implemented
pretty straightforward.
Set up a headset with a
Bluetooth setup assistant,
and it shows up as any other
audio device on the system.
Any application that does audio input or
audio output can take advantage of it.
As part of the headset profile
and the Bluetooth spec,
they define two different roles.
There's the headset role
and the gateway role.
Headset role obviously
applies to headset devices.
Gateway applies to things
like your phone and the Mac.
In our case, we've only implemented the
gateway portion of the profile.
So what that means is with
the existing headset support,
for example,
your phone can't communicate with the
Mac because both are gateway devices.
As well, the headset support is actually
integrated into a SCO audio driver.
So it isn't really generic
SCO support per se,
but rather all integrated together.
At the same time that we introduced
the 1.5 Bluetooth update,
there was an iChat beta release of 2.1
that supported the Bluetooth headsets.
Additionally,
a couple things to note about the
way that the SCO links work is
that currently hardware limitations
restrict us to one SCO link at a time.
So just as a little bit of background,
the SCO link is the type of connection
used between the headset and your
Mac to communicate the audio data.
However, again, since only one link is
supported at a time,
that restricts our ability to support
things like multiple headsets at
once or looking in the future,
maybe using your Mac,
talking to your phone and
your headset at the same time.
An additional limitation is
that speech recognition isn't
supported for Bluetooth headsets.
Unfortunately,
it requires 22 kilohertz 16-bit audio,
whereas the Bluetooth SCO audio
support only provides for
8 kilohertz 16-bit audio.
Unfortunately,
it's just a limitation in the technology.
In the same software update,
the Bluetooth 1.5 update,
we added support for Bluetooth printing.
Now,
this was done through what's called HCRP,
or the Hard Cable Replacement Profile.
Again, in addition to being able to
configure new printers with
the Bluetooth Setup Assistant,
Bluetooth support is integrated
into the print panel and
the printer setup utility.
Now the way that the support was added,
it's just a straightforward
CUPS backend that talks
Bluetooth to the Bluetooth hardware.
We definitely recommend that
printer manufacturers that are
looking to add Bluetooth support
to their printers do so using HCRP.
It should just be plug-and-play with,
or rather unplug-and-play
with the Bluetooth wireless
technology with our support.
One thing to note is that in order to
guarantee that a particular printer
works properly over Bluetooth,
the printer manufacturers must
provide a Bluetooth-certified driver.
So typically that just means testing
it and providing the driver with the
necessary information embedded in it
saying that it is Bluetooth-certified,
but that just avoids cases where
printers might appear to work but don't.
Finally, as I mentioned,
over the past year we added
support for the Bluetooth 1.2
specification in the hardware.
There was a Bluetooth firmware
update version 1.1.
That supports both Apple built-in modules
as well as the external D-Link modules.
Now, one thing to be aware of,
there have been several different
revisions of the D-Link modules.
So it only supports the dbt120
with revision B2 or later.
So you definitely want to make sure of
that before trying the firmware update.
The new firmware adds support for
the 1.2 baseband specification.
So now let's move on to Tiger.
It's what you're all here to see about.
We've added a number of new APIs and
developer applications that should
hopefully be of interest to a lot of you.
As far as APIs go,
we've added a new device
inquiry API in the form of
IO Bluetooth Device Inquiry Object.
We've added a new
OBEX Transfer Services Object to
provide some generic
OBEX file transfer capabilities,
as well as then a set of SCO audio
services to enable third parties to use
the SCO capabilities that we've built in.
That Bluetooth device inquiry
object performs two basic services.
It will perform the inquiries
and notify you about devices that
are in range and discoverable,
as well as part of the process,
it will fetch the names of
the newly discovered devices.
Now one big warning here,
and this is the primary reason
why this is the first time we've
introduced a Bluetooth inquiry API,
is that inquiries are
definitely expensive.
They take bandwidth away from
other Bluetooth connections,
and they have the potential to degrade
802.11 performance as well as interfere
with other 2.4 GHz wireless technologies.
So it's really not something that's
designed to run all of the time and
just continuously look for other
devices because it will have a negative
impact on other things going on.
Now as a result of this,
we've actually implemented throttling
support so that inquiries will be
throttled if they are tempted to be
performed for too long a period of time.
Now typically if you just need to
perform one or two to present the user
with a list of devices in the area,
you won't be affected by the throttling.
But if you do try to just perform
inquiry over and over again,
over time,
the amount of time that you'll be able to
perform an inquiry for will be decreased.
Now the Bluetooth device inquiry object
is fully asynchronous as well with
full C versions of the API available.
There's a new header file that this
API is now available in the TigerSeed.
There's a new header file,
bluetootdeviceinquiry.h,
that has the full API.
So basically what the device
inquiry gives you is more or less
the full functionality of the
Bluetooth device selector minus the UI,
of course.
So you should be able to do everything
that the Bluetooth device selector
does but embed it in your own code.
Now, we still highly recommend if you
need to allow the user to select
a device or to provide the user
with a list of devices in range
that you actually use the built-in
Bluetooth device selector because
it really provides a consistent user
experience across multiple applications.
Let's take a quick
look at the API itself.
It's a class method to
create a new inquiry object.
Now, a delegate is required.
Because the API is fully asynchronous,
the delegate is needed to provide
the callbacks of when the different
phases of the inquiry are taking place.
You can control the length of the
inquiry through set inquiry length.
You can control whether the
inquiry process will update
the device names or not.
Now, if you're presenting them
the list to the users,
you will very likely want the inquiry
object to fetch the names for you.
There are some restrictions depending
on what hardware you're running on,
on exactly when the names can be fetched
compared to when the inquiry can run.
So we've actually embedded
all of that logic,
knowing about what the
hardware capabilities are,
into this object.
So if you use the capability,
or if you use the name update facility,
you'll automatically take advantage
of all that knowledge built in.
Then you also have the expected
start and stop routines to
start and stop the inquiry.
Now the inquiry will stop on its
own when the length of time that
it's supposed to be running has hit.
Additionally, once you call start,
the inquiry might not
actually start immediately.
If the throttling code has been engaged,
it may take some amount of time before
the inquiry will actually begin.
Because there's a delegate
and the API is asynchronous,
there are a number of delegate
methods that get called during
various stages of the inquiry.
So you get notified when
the inquiry is started.
That way you can know the
amount of time between you call
start and it actually starts.
Now if it can start right away,
you might get the inquiry started
routine called immediately.
There's a notification when
a new device gets found,
there's a notification when
the name update process begins,
notification when each
name is actually fetched,
and then a notification once
the inquiry is completed.
So let's go ahead and take a
look at kind of a sample timeline
and what's going to go on when
using the device inquiry object.
So your application is
going to create a new one.
It's going to go ahead and call
start to start the inquiry.
Maybe immediately,
maybe sometime in the future,
you'll get the device
inquiry started notification.
At that point,
the discovery process is ongoing.
So for each device found,
you get a result, device inquiry,
device found,
that tells you the device address,
the class of device so you know,
are you talking with a keyboard,
are you talking with a phone, etc.
But at that point,
you won't have the name unless
the system has previously
fetched it and cached the name.
Once the actual discovery
process completes,
it will begin the name discovery.
So at that point you
get update device names,
tells you how many devices are
left to have their names fetched.
And then during the
name discovery process,
you go ahead and get notified each
time a device name has been fetched.
So that way, one by one,
you'll know exactly what the
names are for each device
that have been discovered.
And then finally,
you get the inquiry complete
when that's finished.
Another new API we've added in Tiger is
a new OBEX file transfer services.
That's the name of an
Objective-C object in,
again, in Tiger, in the Tiger seed,
new header file for it.
What it does is it provides a simplified
API on top of OBEX for kind of the
generic object exchange functionality.
Basically provides a raw implementation
of the object push profile
and the file transfer profile.
provides all the basic low-level file
manipulation primitives you'd expect:
put and get, change directories,
folder listings,
manipulate the remote file system by
adding and removing folders and files.
As with the device inquiry object,
the file transfer services
object is fully asynchronous
with C versions available.
So basically with this new API,
outside of the UI,
you get the full functionality
of the Bluetooth file exchange,
including the object push
and file transfer services.
So let's just take a
quick run through the API.
I'm not going to spend a
whole lot of time on it.
It's a little more detailed
than the device inquiry,
but you have the basic
methods for creating a new
object with an OBEX session.
Again, as with the inquiry object,
it takes a delegate
for all the callbacks.
There's methods for accessing the
current stake and the current path,
notifying whether the
connection is busy or not,
whether it's connected.
API for connecting/disconnecting,
depending on what type
of service you're using,
connect to FTP or connect
to object push services,
as well as then the disconnect operation.
API for sending and receiving files.
as well as then the remote manipulation,
adding, removing folders and files,
changing directories,
as well as then the capability to abort
an operation that's in progress and
retrieve the current folder listings.
Delegate methods, again,
there's quite a number of them.
There's basically a completion for
each action that can be performed.
So, for example, when you tell the API to
connect to a service,
it's going to go ahead and
call the connection complete
method when it's done.
Pretty much the same for all of these,
although there are a couple
of things to note here.
There are two APIs for
actually transferring files
for sending and receiving.
Each one of those contains a transfer
progress method as delegate method as
well as a transfer complete method.
Now, the progress includes a number
of useful bits of information.
In addition to just the
amount of data that's been
transferred and how much is left,
it includes the elapsed time as
well as estimated time remaining and
instantaneous transfer rate calculations.
So,
that should actually make it pretty easy
to wire that information into your... UI.
So let's just take a quick run through
a sample object push operation.
You're going to create the new
OBEX File Transfer Services object,
and then call, in this case,
connect to object push service.
That's going to go ahead,
send a message to the
remote device to connect up.
Once that completes,
you get the connection complete message.
If there was an error,
you'll be notified at that point.
Once the connection is complete,
it's okay to perform
any of the operations.
In this case,
since we're only using Object Push,
Send File is the only facility
that we have available to us.
So we're going to go
ahead and call Send File.
Then as the file transfers,
you'll continuously,
at regular intervals,
get the Send File progress with the
transfer progress so you can know exactly
how far the transfer is completed.
Once that's finished,
you go ahead and get a send file
complete with the error code as well.
So if an error occurred during the time,
this is the notification that you'll get.
Once the transfer is complete,
you actually have the option of
you can perform another operation
or go ahead and disconnect.
Once the disconnection is finished,
you'll get disconnection complete method.
So now let's move on to the new Skull
Audio API that we've added in Tiger.
Now, in Panther,
we really had limited SCO support.
We did have built-in support
for Bluetooth headsets,
but there was really no API to
customize the SCO behavior or to
tap into the SCO functionality.
Additionally, core audio was the only
means to access that data,
so that was the only communication that
any external developer had with a Sko,
with a headset or other Sko audio device.
In Tiger now, we're adding this new
SCO Audio API that really provides
full control over the SCO link.
So you control exactly when
the SCO link is created.
It provides an audio driver
and the ability to configure
exactly how that driver appears.
So you can say exactly how many
audio controls are created.
Does it have a volume control?
Does it have a mute control?
What is the volume range, et cetera?
The new API supports both
incoming and outgoing connections,
so again, which you have control over,
so depending on exactly what
type of device you're talking to,
what profile you're using,
you can implement it exactly
the way that's intended.
As part of the API,
a SCO Audio driver is created,
but instead of having, as with Panther,
all of the support for communicating
with headsets built in,
it just provides audio I.O.
services.
As far as the API goes,
we've actually split it here.
You have the iBluetooth framework for
all the standard Bluetooth services.
So, for example,
in the case of the headset profile,
it needs to use an RFCOM channel
to communicate with the headset
to indicate things like ring,
button press, volume changes, etc.
So, again,
the Bluetooth framework is where
you're going to communicate over any
of the standard Bluetooth services.
Then Core Audio is the API to
be used both for audio I.O.
as well as to communicate with the
driver in terms of being notified
about applications on the system
wanting to create an audio connection
and being able to control exactly when
those Go links get created and being
informed of any audio-related errors.
The API itself on the surface
appears pretty simple.
There's just two functions,
although it does get a bit
more complex than that.
There's the basic two functions.
I have Bluetooth Add SCO Audio Device.
I have Bluetooth Remove SCO Audio Device.
The Add function basically will create
a SCO Audio driver for your device.
As part of the API,
a configuration dictionary
parameter is provided,
and that's really what provides
the core of the customizable
features in the audio API.
So it's that configuration dictionary
that allows you to specify exactly
what audio controls are created
and how they appear in the system,
specify behavior on new connections,
among others.
Now the caller of this API is
responsible basically to create
any new Bluetooth services.
So for example,
if the audio support you're
adding allows the device to
connect back up to the host,
you'll very likely need to add a
Bluetooth SDP service record that
matches the service that you're providing
so the device knows exactly how to
connect up and how to talk to you.
Additionally, any non-SCO data, again,
like L2CAP, RFCOM, needs to be handled by
the client in this case.
The system will not do it for you.
The iBluetooth
Remove SCO Audio Device API simply will
remove that driver from the system.
So the add functionality adds it,
remove removes it.
It's basically up to the
client to do everything else.
In addition to those new APIs,
we've created a couple of new
applications that should help
you develop applications for
Bluetooth applications for Mac OS X.
We've added a new packet logger
tool and Bluetooth Explorer utility.
PacketLogger is pretty much a
completely rebuilt version of the
previous PacketCoder 2 application
with a lot of new functionality.
It's actually really nice.
It helps a lot when
developing applications.
So it supports multiple
PacketLog windows.
The previous application had only
a single window where you could
either view the current log of
the system or one loaded in file,
where the new one allows as
many open documents as you want.
We've added improved decoding
and searching support so that
what you see in the packet log
is a little bit more verbose.
It provides a little more of the
information that you're likely to need.
And then the searching capabilities
allows you to quickly type
in a particular block of
data that you're looking for,
whether textually or using hex.
There's also a couple of new data views.
In addition to the decoded view,
like you're used to seeing,
there's a raw view that provides
just the basic raw data.
If that's the way that
you want to look at it,
if that's what you're used to seeing,
you can go ahead and see exactly
what's being sent and received
over the Bluetooth link.
And it also provides
a new flow data view,
which kind of provides a summary
by connection of exactly what
packets are on the system.
So basically, all of the connection and
disconnection events are summarized,
and so you can choose what
connection you're interested in,
what L2CAP channel, what RFCOM channel,
and it will just then restrict
the packets that it lists to those
associated with that channel.
We've added support for data markers,
so if there are certain parts
of the log that you want to
mark and come back to later,
you can do that.
We provided some additional
auto backup support.
Previously in the Packet
Decoder 2 application,
it would automatically,
assuming you choose to do so,
it will automatically save the
current packet log to disk.
But every time you started
and stopped the decoder,
it would overwrite the previous log,
so it's real easy to accidentally
lose an important log.
So this new Packet Logger
application will actually
support multiple backup files and
won't overwrite the previous one.
Instead, it will create a new one.
And then finally, this hopefully would be
helpful for a lot of people,
is that there's no SDK required in
order to run the packet logger tool.
Before,
you had to install an SDK with a custom
build of the Bluetooth family text,
where now it's just built in.
The logger tool itself will
just require authentication.
Then once you've authenticated,
you can go ahead and capture
Bluetooth data on any system.
The other application we've added
is a new Bluetooth Explorer utility,
which provides kind of a
snapshot of the Bluetooth stack
and the Bluetooth hardware.
provides active inquiry information,
so if there's an ongoing inquiry,
it will show exactly what
devices are in the area and the
relevant information about them.
It provides detailed information
about the hardware on your system,
including all of the
Bluetooth features that it supports,
the device address,
specific versions of the
various Bluetooth technologies
that it implements,
etc.
We've added new support for
the device cache being managed.
So you can actually view the
current cache devices on the
system as well as delete them.
There's also a panel that allows you
to switch between multiple controllers.
So if you have a built-in
Bluetooth module and say you have an
external one that you want to test out
to make sure it works with your hardware,
for example, you can simply insert that,
go to the Bluetooth controller setup,
and switch to that module and the
system will just automatically
switch over to using it.
Then finally,
there's Connection Monitor functionality,
which basically is the old
Bluetooth monitor application
just integrated into the
new Bluetooth Explorer.
So now I'd like to invite one of
the Bluetooth software engineers,
Jason Giles,
up here to go ahead and demo some
of the new applications for you.
Thanks, Eric.
So let's check out these applications
that Eric just talked about.
Can I get demo one?
Okay,
so the first one I'd like to show is
the Bluetooth Explorer application.
This application, as Eric mentioned,
is the reworked Bluetooth monitor,
and we've added a whole bunch of
new features that we think will help
make your developing lives easier.
So, the first thing I'd like to show is
the local device information panel.
And as you can see here,
you get a snapshot of the
hardware that is currently in
use in the Bluetooth system.
And as you can see,
it has the general hardware information,
including the device address,
the manufacturer of the part,
HCI and LMP version information,
as well as the Bluetooth specification
hardware features,
such as three-slot packets, etc.
So, as you can see,
the ones in black are the ones that are
supported on this particular dongle.
The ones in gray are not supported.
If we had a different dongle,
we would probably see different
attributes highlighted.
We also have the version.
We have the version
easily accessible for you.
So,
if you're going to send us a bug report,
we highly recommend that you
send us the stack version,
because that really helps us determine
what exactly is going on in the system.
This panel, or this tab,
is the Class of Device tab.
This is a representation of how
other devices sees your computer.
So, other devices can see what services
it has or what device class it shows.
So, the system automatically determines
what major and minor device class
and services are on your system.
But if you had a need to spoof a
different kind of device on a computer,
like let's say you wanted this
computer to be a cellular phone,
you could just select phone and choose
what type of phone for the minor class.
Now, if you set that class
of device on the system,
all other devices, your phones,
other computers,
would see this computer as a phone.
So, that's an interesting
thing that might be useful.
So, that's something that might be
useful to you if you had that need.
Finally, there's a Services tab that
shows you the installed services
on the Bluetooth system.
So, on this system,
we have the Bluetooth PDA sync service
as well as the OBEX object push service.
If you're installing your
own service on the system,
it would show up in this panel.
If it does not show up here,
it's probably not installed correctly,
and the system, the Bluetooth system is
not seeing that service,
code and check for errors.
So the next thing we've added
is the HCI controller selector.
And this allows you to actually
have multiple Bluetooth hardware
dongles installed on your machine.
And you could use different ones if
you wanted to test your software out
with different vendors' hardware.
So on this particular system,
I have set up a Broadcom
dongle as well as a CSR dongle.
As you can see over here,
we're currently using
the Broadcom dongle.
If we switch to the CSR one
and make that active,
this is an administration operation,
so it requests or asks for your password.
Type that in.
Go over to refresh.
And as you can see now,
we're using the CSR part
to do Bluetooth activity.
This is not persistent.
If you restart your machine,
it will reset itself to
the default HCI controller,
and you will have to go back
here to select a different one.
So there's other things that
the Bluetooth Explorer offers.
We invite you to check
it out on the tiger seed.
So the next one I'd like to
show is the packet logger.
And you'll notice on launch the first
thing it asks you is to authenticate.
And that is because it doesn't
require the SDK anymore,
but it does require administration
access to get to the data.
So here we have a live
packet decoder window.
And if we go over to
the preferences file,
system preferences panel,
it generates some
Bluetooth traffic there you see.
And so here we have 13 packets.
And there we go.
No SDK build and we've
received Bluetooth packets.
So the next thing I'd like to show
you is a file that I've recorded
doing an FTP transfer from a
mobile phone to our computer.
And as Eric pointed out,
there's three views to the
packet logger window now.
There's the Dakota view, the Flow view,
and the Raw view.
So if we were interested in seeing,
let's say, this SDP packet here,
as it relates to other
pieces of the system,
we could go over to the Flow view and
see that here's the SDP information
packets that have been sent and received.
This is the one that I selected.
And here it shows its
relation to the L2CAP layer.
So these packets were generated
based on this connection response
and this connection in L2CAP.
And then we can keep going back
further and see that all of
this L2CAP traffic was generated
based on this HCI connection.
This is great when you have multiple
connections to different devices in the
same packet or even the same device.
For example, in this case,
we have on this device,
we've requested SDP information,
but we've also
and a different connection
done RF-COM traffic.
And then you can even go
into this RF-COM connection,
for example,
on channel 7 and note that these
are all the packets that were
transferred over this channel.
And then finally we have the raw view.
So if I was interested in this
packet here and seeing what the
raw bytes were sent over received
to and from the Bluetooth hardware,
I can switch to the raw view and
see the actual bytes that were sent.
So now I'd like to demonstrate the
markers capability that we've added.
Clicking the M button
brings up the markers panel.
And as you can see here,
I've already established
two markers in this file.
The first FTP folder listing,
we can go to that.
[Transcript missing]
And if we go back to our marker,
we can see that the packet that we were
showing before is now decoded in OBEX.
And if we twist that down,
we can see that we see the type
header and the connection ID header.
The next marker I have set is the
first get JPEG command that we
send to actually receive a file,
to request a file from the
FTP server that we've connected to.
So if, for example,
you received a connection refused or
request refused or bad request error,
you could actually
twist this down and see,
okay, here's my request that
I actually sent out.
Here's the picture 3 file that we
requested and the connection ID.
If something was wrong,
we could see that, oh, you know,
we didn't send the name
properly or something like that.
We can also see that the data is embedded
throughout the whole Bluetooth stack.
So, for example, this is an OBEX packet.
Now we can see that the
RFCOM packet is right here.
And we can look at the
details of that RFCOM packet.
And then from there,
we can go into the L2CAP.
All the way down to the ACL layer.
So you can see all of the data
top to bottom really quickly.
Another thing that we've
added is a find panel.
So if you're interested in a
particular command that you've sent,
like let's say an OBEX command
disconnect because you suspect there's
something wrong with the disconnect.
This will bring up all the
packets that are related or
that have the search keywords.
You can do operator
keyword characters as well.
If you put in an or character
or an and character,
you can actually do and/or searches.
So if we click on this,
we are quickly taken to
the appropriate packet.
If we wanted to add a marker
to that particular packet
for someone else to see,
This is a description field.
We can put in a description.
This is the...
We're going to add that marker.
And now once we save the
changes into our document,
you can go quickly back,
refer quickly back to
that spot at any time.
Last thing I'd like to show
you is the Inspector Panel.
This is a very simple way
For you to look at the top-down
data structure as well.
[Transcript missing]
Let's go ahead and move
on to the next topic.
I want to talk about
asynchronous application design.
It's kind of a mouthful, and it--
[Transcript missing]
The asynchronous API basics.
So all asynchronous
operations use callbacks.
Typically, the callback will be made
when the operation completes.
Seems pretty obvious,
but it isn't always,
and the documentation isn't
always totally clear about that.
Additionally,
the callback that gets made as a result
of a particular operation may actually
be called after that operation returns.
That's what actually causes a lot
of the trouble when developing an
application using these type of APIs.
A lot of times you want to
execute a number of operations
synchronously that typically you
just go execute them one right after
another on the same block of code.
Unfortunately,
now that the first operation
might not complete until after.
The initial function returns,
you now have to go and move that second
call into the callback for the first
and then maybe move the third call
into the callback from the second.
All of the Bluetooth operations
have asynchronous versions.
Additionally, some of our APIs,
especially just a couple of
new ones that we saw today,
the device inquiry and
OBEX file transfer services,
are only asynchronous.
So you're pretty much forced to actually
develop your application that way.
An additional note here is that
the OWL Bluetooth framework
is not thread safe,
so you can't just simply fire off
another thread to go ahead and
perform the asynchronous operation,
do 1, 2, 3, etc.
because all of the Bluetooth calls
must be made from the same thread.
So why do we even create
these asynchronous APIs and
why should you use them?
Well, primarily,
Bluetooth itself is asynchronous.
We send a command,
then we have to wait for
the device to respond,
both the local hardware
and the remote device.
So our implementation really
is based on that design.
That's how it works.
Additionally, and many times,
it can be less complex than
using multiple threads.
There's no locking to worry about.
You don't have to deal with
multi-thread issues like that.
And it's really similar to
the Cocoa Delegate model.
So a lot of you that
have done Cocoa work,
it should be very familiar.
So there's definitely a number of
pros and cons associated with it.
On the pro side,
the operations don't block.
So your UI doesn't lock up.
It provides for a much better user
experience when doing those things.
The user doesn't click
a button and then wait,
wait, wait,
watching the cursor spin as some
long-running operation takes place.
It also provides the developer with
the ability to implement UI that
allows a user to cancel the operations.
So it's a lot more
user-friendly in that way.
Unfortunately,
while asynchronous design can
make it simpler in that you don't
have the multiple thread issues,
it also can be more complicated
because the sequential operations
that you might want to do can't
be all implemented at once.
So let's take a look at basically
some sample asynchronous behavior,
kind of what goes on
within the Bluetooth stack.
So what first happens is based on the
first call into the Bluetooth framework,
the Bluetooth framework itself will
create a number of run-loop event sources
to handle the asynchronous callbacks
from the various parts of the system,
the kernel and the daemon,
the BlueD process.
So go ahead, it'll create those
run-loop event sources.
Now, one thing to note here is that
the run loop for the thread that
first calls into the stack is the
run loop that will be used for
all of the asynchronous callbacks.
So that thread has to have a run loop run
on it after the Bluetooth calls are made.
And from that point on is the
only thread that you can make
calls into the Bluetooth stack.
So none of the other threads
can actually make the calls.
Now, you might try it and it might work,
but it's not guaranteed to work.
There's no locking in there.
It's very easy for multiple threads
to step on one another and have
really unpredictable results.
An additional note is that if
you're performing UI operations
through the Bluetooth UI framework,
that only the main thread can be
used to make the Bluetooth calls.
Now that's because typically
all the UI operations have
to occur on the main thread.
So let's take a look a little more
detail about how a Bluetooth connection
operation will work within this model.
So the first thing that happens is
your application is just going to
call Bluetooth device open connection.
It's going to pass in
itself the callback.
So that's going to go into
the Bluetooth framework.
At that point,
the framework is going to turn around and
make a call into the kernel to go ahead
and perform that connection operation.
So it makes a call down into the kernel.
Now we're still on the original thread,
although it's executing in the kernel.
The kernel is going to go ahead
and take a look at the callback
information provided by your client.
It's going to go ahead and then
store that away so that when the
operation actually completes,
it knows who made the call
and who needs to get notified.
At that point,
depending on the state of the system,
the kernel may actually send the
HCI command to create the connection,
or it might queue it up for later,
depending on if the
hardware is busy or not.
So in this case,
we'll go see it sends the command.
And then at that point,
this particular operation is done.
The client thread's going to return.
Your run loop's going to be free to run,
process user events, et cetera.
So the system is just now waiting
for this operation to complete.
If you have a UI application,
the user is free to go ahead
and perform other tasks.
Once the operation is complete,
we'll actually see the command complete
event coming in from the device.
This gets run.
The callback into the kernel
is done on a kernel thread.
So I'll see the hardware notify the
kernel with the command complete event.
At that point, the kernel says, "Okay,
let me try and find to see if
there was an asynchronous call
that did the original connection."
So it's going to go ahead,
look up the callback information.
In this case,
it finds information about our
client application so it knows
exactly which application made the
call and which needs the callback.
At that point,
the kernel will then just send a
message to the framework in the
application using that RunLoop
event source that was created.
At this point, the kernel is done.
The kernel thread is finished
and is off doing other things.
The application thread now,
the RunLoop event source will go
ahead and receive the kernel message.
The framework will extract the
callback information and then
just call the original caller,
notifying it that the
command has completed.
Now, that seems pretty simple,
but there are definitely a
number of design considerations
that I need to keep in mind.
So, for example, when you have multiple
operations to perform,
your application really
is to keep track of.
It may do multiple things at once.
It needs to know exactly
what's outstanding,
be able to deal with errors
that come up at any time.
If there are future operations
that it needs to perform
once certain events complete,
it needs to keep track of
exactly what it needs to do next.
So,
depending on exactly what you're doing,
you may need to implement some
kind of queuing mechanism or state
machine to keep track of what's going
on and what should be done next.
That's really where the
complexity comes in.
An additional point to note
is that your UI will be active
while the operation is pending.
So the user is free to go
ahead and perform any operation
that's available to them.
As a result, it's really recommended that
you disable any controls that
shouldn't be accessed while this
particular operation is outstanding.
We also really recommend that you provide
some kind of status and potentially
a progress notification that a
particular operation is going on as well.
and then as much as possible,
providing UI to be able to cancel an
operation that may be long running really
is a lot more friendly to the end user.
And then lastly,
really pay attention to the error codes.
They are definitely there for a reason.
All of the Bluetooth API returns
error codes.
All of the callbacks include error codes.
Typically, if an error is returned
from an API call itself,
it means that the operation,
that the callback itself
will not be called,
that the operation failed
during the initial phase.
If you get an error in the callback,
again, it usually means that that
operation failed to complete.
So if you had the next operation
that depended on the first
one completing successfully,
you don't want to call that
because it won't succeed either.
Now,
there may be some exceptions to those.
There are a couple of error codes
that actually indicate success,
but the system may be in a state
other than what was expected.
In those cases,
those codes will be documented.
So now we've got a number of avenues
that you can go to for more information.
Our IO Technology Evangelist
is Craig Keithley,
and he is pretty much the main
contact for any developer relations
issues as well as going through
just the standard developer support.
We've also provided a Bluetooth developer
mailing list that you can get to.
I believe any ADC member is free
to join the developer mail list.
Is that right, Craig?
Okay, well,
anybody can join the mailing list.
And it's kind of the
traffic comes and goes,
but feel free to join.
Look at the traffic going on.
See what kind of questions
people are asking.
Feel free to ask your own.
The Bluetooth engineers at Apple,
we do monitor that list regularly.
We don't always have,
we can't guarantee that we're going to
be able to respond to every question,
but we do try to pay attention
and answer where we can.
I've also got sample code and
documentation written as well.
So there's working with
Bluetooth devices documentation,
Bluetooth device access,
and Bluetooth user interface that are
all in the installed Tiger documentation.